For this assignment, you have to implement a Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) which should incorporate
only the following features on top of the unreliable UDP sockets:
• Reliability (meaning proper re-transmissions in the event of packet losses / corruption)
• Data Integrity (with checksums)
• Opening and Closing Connections (SYN and FIN)
• Optimizations (fast retransmit on 3 or more duplicate ACKs)
Notably, you do not need to have adjusting window size, as that will be provided to you as a command line
parameter, but you still must have the retransmit behavior expected when there is no response or duplicate
ACKs.
We will test the TCP version you have implemented by transferring files from the client to the server using
your implementation under different network conditions.
2.1 Protocol Specification
The various components of the protocol that you have to develop are explained step by step. Please strictly
adhere to the specifications.
2.1.1 Message Format
All data are sent using UDP. You have to communicate all the transport layer information in the data
portion of a UDP packet. To support reliability, hosts will implement a variant of the Go-Back-N protocol.
The sender will tag each outgoing message with an increasing sequence number. The receiver will use the
sequence numbers to ensure that all messages have been received in the correct order. If a message is
received out of order it will be stored in the receiver’s buffer (but not delivered to an application) and an
acknowledgment corresponding to the last successful contiguous byte received will be retransmitted. The
sender will maintain an acknowledgment timeout based on the round trip time of the link between the end
hosts. If a duplicate acknowledgment is received or if the acknowledgment timeout expires the sender will
resend the unacknowledged segment destined for the receiver. A one’s complement checksum (The detailed
explanation is in later section) on the data part is used to enforce message integrity. See figure 4 for details.
• Byte Sequence Number is incremented according to the bytes sent. It indicates the position of the
first byte of the data in this segment.
• Acknowledgment indicates the next byte expected in the reverse direction
• Timestamp is derived from the System.nanoTime() function and is the time of data transmission (in
nanoSeconds) which is 64 bits (or 8 bytes) long in size.
• Length is the length of the data portion (in bytes) and please pay attention that the least three
significant bits are used by flags. That means valid number of bits for the length field are only 29 bits
(You will need to do bit manipulation to access and set these fields).
• Three flags: S for SYN, A for ACK, and F for FIN.
7
Figure 4: Binary packet format
Byte Sequence Number
0 16 313029
Acknowledgment
Timestamp
Length S F A
All Zeros Checksum
Data
• Checksum is the one’s complement checksum computed over the entire packet with the checksum
assumed zero in the input. See appendix A on how to calculate one’s complement checksum.
2.1.2 Maximum Number of Retransmissions
If unacknowledged messages remain in a host’s send buffer and no response from the destination has been
received after multiple retransmission attempts, the sending host will stop trying to send the messages and
report an error. This maximum is set to 16 by default.
2.1.3 Maximum Transmission Unit
Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU) determines the maximum size of payload that can be transmitted in
one packet. So, in order to transfer a huge file, it needs to be divided into smaller chunks, the maximum size
of each chunk being MTU. It is passed as a command line argument to the client and server during startup.
2.1.4 Connection State and Peer Actions
Suppose host A wants to send a message to host B. Assume, for now, that A has never sent a message to B
(as will be clear, it does not matter if A has rebooted or has sent a message a long time ago, etc.).
• Data Send Actions: A will send a data segment as governed by the size of the sliding congestion
window. In this assignment, the congestion window is a configured parameter. A will include a
monotonically increasing timestamp (See Section 2.2 on how to compute this timestamp) on the packet.
If A thinks this is a new connection (because it has never communicated with B before, or because it
has somehow lost the connection state to B), it will set the sequence number to 0. For each subsequent
message, A will include a new timestamp on the packet and increment the sequence number by the
number of bytes sent.
• Receiver Actions
Connection start and data transfer: If this is the first time B is communicating with A and has
just received a segment with sequence number equal to zero, it creates a new connection state for A. For
each segment received, B will send an acknowledgment to A. The acknowledgment packet has sequence
number corresponding to the next expected byte. If no data is sent along with the acknowledgment,
the length of this segment will be zero. Note data packets cannot have zero length. B also copies
the timestamp field from the data segment into the corresponding ACK segment. Thus, A can use
8
this timestamp field in the acknowledgment to calculate the round trip time for segments (refer to our
discussion in class on calculating round trip times).
Retransmissions: For each packet sent, the sender must maintain a retransmission timer (the com-
putation of the timer is described in the next section). Whenever a packet has not been ACKed before
its retransmission timer goes off, it must be re-sent. There is a timer set for the re-transmissions as
well — thus, if the re-transmission is not ACKed, the packet will be re-re-transmitted. Apart from
timeout based retransmissions, the sender also uses three duplicate acknowledgments for the same
sequence number as an indicator of loss and retransmits the corresponding lost segment. This is the
“fast retransmit” approach.
2.2 Timeout Computation
The sender places the current time in the packet timestamp field of the message header. When a packet is
acknowledged by the receiving client it will copy the packet timestamp into the acknowledged timestamp
field. When the sender receives the acknowledgment it can subtract the acknowledgment timestamp from
the current time to calculate the round trip time. If a client is sending a cumulative acknowledgment of
several packets, the timestamp from the latest received packet which is causing this acknowledgment should
be copied into the reply, in terms of time received. That is, if packet 4 arrives after packet 5, the cumulative
acknowledgment up to packet 5 should include timestamp from packet 4.
We will use a simple exponentially weighted average to compute the timeout.
Before sending the first packet, the timeout value is, arbitrarily, set to 5 seconds. Assume the sender has
just received an ack with sequence S and timestamp T. Let C be the current time at the sender and TO be
the timeout time.
if (S = 0)
ERTT := (C - T)
EDEV := 0
TO := 2*ERTT
else
SRTT := (C - T)
SDEV := |SRTT - ERTT|
ERTT := a*ERTT + (1-a)*SRTT
EDEV := b*EDEV + (1-b)*SDEV
TO := ERTT + 4*EDEV
The value of a is set to 0.875 and b is 0.75.
Computing the sender timestamp: In the 64-bit timestamp field, the sender includes a monotonically in-
creasing timestamp with granularity of one nanosecond. This can be obtained from the System.nanoTime()
function.
2.3 Host Commands/Output Format
Feel free to create any additional files from the ones mentioned below. You are allowed to use the java.net
package relating only to UDP packets.
You will implement a java executable called TCPend. You will need a sender and receiver connection to start
the file transfer. Command line arguments will indicate which host is the initiator of a TCP transfer. The
sender TCPend must support the following options at startup:
java TCPend -p <port> -s <remote IP> -a <remote port> -f <file name> -m <mtu> -c <sws>
• port: port number at which the client will run
• remote IP: the IP address of the remote peer (i.e. receiver). With the -s flag your program should
operate in sending mode.
9
• remote port: the port at which the remote receiver is running
• file name: the file to be sent
• mtu: maximum transmission unit in bytes
• sws: sliding window size in number of segments
The remote receiver uses the following set of arguments:
java TCPend -p <port> -m <mtu> -c <sws> -f <file name>
• port: port number at which the receiver will listen at
• file name: the path where the incoming file should be written
• mtu: maximum transmission unit in bytes
• sws: sliding window size in number of segments
Host Output
Each host should output the information about each segment that it sends and receives in the following
format:
<snd/rcv> <time> <flag-list> <seq-number> <number of bytes> <ack number>
where flag list includes S for SYN, A for ACK, F for FIN and D for data. The following are valid output
lines for a connection initiator that sends 112 bytes of data:
snd 34.335 S - - - 0 0 0
rcv 34.8 S A - - 0 0 1
snd 34.81 - A - - 1 0 1
snd 35.5 - A - D 1 56 1
snd 35.6 - A - D 57 56 1
rcv 36.2 - A - - 1 0 113
snd 36.65 - - F - 113 0 1
rcv 37.2 - A F - 1 0 114
snd 37.3 - A - - 114 0 2
At the end of the transfer, i.e., once the connection has been closed you should print the following statistics:
- Amount of Data transferred/received
- Number of packets sent/received
- Number of out-of-sequence packets
- Number of packets discarded due to incorrect checksum
- Number of retransmissions
- Number of duplicate acknowledgements
All of these should be printed on a single line with just spaces between them in this order, for example:
50Mb 50000 500 0 50 500
3 Testing
To test your implementation you could use a mininet virtual topology like you have been doing in the earlier
assignments but modify the router implementation to drop packets with a given probability. E.g., drop 5%
of the IP packets received. Then you could try sending the file from one mininet host to another (use xterm
to open terminal windows on different mininet hosts) connected via the modified router and see if the file
gets transferred correctly. Here is a sample router implementation of your assignment2 which drops roughly
5% of the packets. Look at the end of forwardIPPacket() method inside Router.java. You can modify
the drop rates for your testing. You can use the similar commands from assignment 2 to run it.
To run it first start mininet using the following command:
10
sudo ./run_mininet.py topos/single_rt.topo -a
Then start pox:
./run_pox.sh
Then start your virtual router that you’ve modified that will drop 5% of all the packets.
java -jar VirtualNetwork.jar -v r1 -r rtable.r1 -a arp_cache
Now open terminal windows on hosts h1 and h2 by typing xterm h1 h2 in mininet console. Navigate to
the directory where with your TCP implementation and send a file from h1 to h2. If your implementation
is correct, the file should be successfully transferred to h2 i.e., content should exactly match. In addition to
visual inspection of the received file, you may also use checksum utilities such as sha256sum to verify that
the files are indeed identical.
Note that this assignment is more open ended than your previous assignments in this course. You have more
freedom for your implementation methodology as long as you correctly meet the protocol defined above. To
test, the TAs would try to transfer files of different sizes (small, medium, large) with different packet drop
rates and would check if data transfer was correct. I.e., file received by the receiver should be identical to
the one present at the sender.
